Policy 606: Policy Prohibiting Hazing


Northeastern University is committed to promoting a safe and healthy environment for all members of the community and to preventing hazing before it occurs, and/or providing appropriate remedial action in instances when hazing occurs.
This policy applies to all faculty, staff, students, volunteers, and affiliates who are contracted to provide services on behalf of the university. It applies to on- and off-campus behavior and activities.

For purposes of this policy:
Hazing shall have the meanings set forth in the Code of Student Conduct and Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 269, Section 17.

A. Prohibition on Hazing
Northeastern University strictly prohibits any action taken or situation created, whether voluntary or involuntary, for the purpose of initiation, admission into, affiliation with, or as a condition for continued membership in a group or organization, which endangers the mental or physical health or safety of a student, creates risk of injury, causes mental or physical fatigue or distress, discomfort, embarrassment, harassment, ridicule, or intimidation, causes damage to or destruction of property, or which is a violation of law, university policy, or the Code of Student Conduct. Such activities include, but are not limited to, the following: striking another student by hand or with any instrument; requiring or advocating alcohol or other drug use; late sessions/meetings that interfere with academic activities; tattooing, branding, or piercing; physical or psychological shocks; wearing of apparel in public that is embarrassing, humiliating, or degrading; or games/activities causing or resulting in fatigue, sleep deprivation, mental distress, panic, embarrassment, or humiliation.
B. Reporting Instances of Hazing
Victims or anyone who witnesses instances of hazing are strongly encouraged to report them.
Faculty and staff with information relating to an instance of hazing are required to immediately report such information to Northeastern University Police Department (“NUPD”), the Office for Student Conduct and Conflict Resolution (“OSCCR”), the Center for Student Involvement (“CSI”), or the Athletics Department (“Athletics”).
Any person may report allegations of, or information relating to, instances of hazing to any of the following offices: NUPD; the Office for University Equity and Compliance (“OUEC”); OSCCR; CSI; Athletics; and/or the Office for Residential Life (“ResLife”). To make an anonymous report of a known or suspected violation, you may also use the university’s whistleblower hotline: northeastern.ethicspoint.com
C. Temporary Measures
In instances where the health and safety of the Northeastern community are deemed to be in jeopardy due to allegations of hazing by an individual/organization/team/group, the Senior Vice Provost for Student Affairs or designee may immediately issue an administrative directive to terminate such behavior, or interimly suspend the individual/organization/team/group from participating or meeting until the matter has been resolved.
D. Investigation/Resolution
Upon receipt of such information, an investigation into the allegation will commence. Any information gathered that supports a claim of hazing will be forwarded to OSCCR (if a student) or the appropriate department (if an employee) for resolution consistent with its procedures for dealing with such complaints.

The University will not tolerate retaliation against any person who in good faith makes a report of hazing. Any person who retaliates directly or indirectly against a victim, witness, person reporting hazing, a respondent and/or charged party or any person involved in any aspect of a complaint or resolution of an allegation of hazing will be subject to discipline, up to and including termination (if an employee) or expulsion (if a student). In Canada, violation of this policy my constitute cause for termination.


Northeastern University Police Department (NUPD) at:
– Emergency Line: (617) 373-3333 – Non-emergency line: (617) 373-2121
https://www.northeastern.edu/nupd/
International Response Line +1(312)-470-3108
Office for University Equity and Compliance (“OUEC”) and Title IX Coordinator at
(617)-373-4644 125 Richards Hall http://www.northeastern.edu/titleix/
Office of Student Conduct and Conflict Resolution (OSCCR) at
(617) 373-4390 http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/
Center for Student Involvement (CSI) at
(617) 373-2642 https://csi.sites.northeastern.edu/
Office for Residential Life (ResLife) at
(617) 373-2814 https://housing.northeastern.edu/
Office of the Senior Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs at
(617) 373-4384 https://studentlife.northeastern.edu/
Athletic Department at
(617) 373-2672 https://nuhuskies.com/

Responsible Office/Department(s)
Athletics
CSI
OSCCR

Related Policies
Code of Ethical Conduct
Code of Student Conduct
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Hazing; Membership; Clubs; Organization; Athletics; Initiation
Version History
Last Revision Date: January 16, 2020
Issued: January 1, 1985
