Policy 419: Policy on Reasonable Accommodation


The university recognizes that individuals with a disability may need a reasonable accommodation to have equally effective opportunities to participate in employment. The purpose of this policy is to meet requirements of federal and state anti-discrimination laws and to provide employees with reasonable accommodations as required by law.
This policy applies to qualified disabled applicants and employees.

For the purposes of this policy, Federal and State anti- discrimination law definitions of disability, reasonable accommodations, undue hardship and other definitions and legal standards pertinent to the provision of reasonable accommodations apply.[1]

The university is committed to providing equal access to employment opportunities for qualified persons with disabilities.
Upon request for an accommodation, the university will provide a reasonable accommodation to any otherwise qualified disabled applicant or employee so long as such accommodation does not create an undue burden on the university, as defined by law.

The university provides reasonable accommodations:
when an applicant with a disability needs accommodation in order to be considered for a job;
when an otherwise qualified employee with a disability needs accommodation to enable him or her to perform the essential functions of the job or to gain access to the workplace, and
when an employee with a disability needs accommodation to access the benefits and privileges of employment.
The university will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide reasonable accommodations in a prompt, fair and efficient manner.

An applicant for employment may request a reasonable accommodation orally or in writing from the university employee with whom the applicant has contact in connection with the application process or through Human Resources (“HR”).
An employee (faculty or staff) may request a reasonable accommodation orally or in writing from his/her supervisor, HR, or the Office of Belonging.
Oral requests for accommodations should be reduced to writing.
Under certain circumstances, as allowed or required by applicable law, an employee may be required to provide medical documentation to support a request for a reasonable accommodation. An employee also may be required to undergo an independent medical examination.
If an individual feels that he or she has been unfairly denied a reasonable accommodation, the individual may file a complaint with the Office for University Equity and Compliance (OUEC). In addition, a complaint may be filed with either or any of the jurisdictionally appropriate the agencies listed below. Filing a complaint with OUEC does not prohibit an individual from filing a complaint with the appropriate government ministry or agency.

Office of Belonging (617) 373-5301
Human Resources (617) 373-2230
Office for University Equity and Compliance (617) 373-4644

Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources
Office of Belonging

Related Policies
Policy on Equal Opportunity
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Disability; Accommodation
Version History
Last Revision Date: September 14, 2022
Issued: July 1, 2015
