Policy 415: Policy on Probationary Period


This policy provides for the Probationary Period for all full and part-time benefits eligible employees, employees who transfer or are promoted to a different position, re-hires, and non-faculty employees who are not affiliated with a collective bargaining unit.
This policy does not apply to disciplinary probation.

For purposes of this policy, Probationary Period means the first ninety (90) days of employment or as may be extended consistent with this policy, for all regular full-time or part-time benefits eligible employees.

A. General
During the probationary period, the employee’s manager assesses the employee’s ability to satisfactorily perform the job responsibilities in a manner consistent with university and department expectations, standards, policies and procedures. the Probationary Period may be extended with the discretion of the manager for not longer than an additional 90 days for a total period not to exceed six months. Nothing in this policy alters or changes the at will status of an employee, and completion of the Probationary Period does not guarantee continued employment.
There is a continuing expectation that employees will maintain acceptable standards of performance at all times during their employment by the university.
If an employee does not perform at a satisfactory level during the Probationary Period of any extension thereof, the manager, in consultation with Human Resources, may terminate the employee.
During the Probationary Period, employees accrue vacation and may use allotted sick days.
B. Transfers, Promotions and Rehires
A new Probationary Period commences when an employee transfers or is promoted to a different position, unless otherwise determined by the department in consultation with Human Resources. Should an employee not satisfactorily meet job expectations, the department must confer with Human Resources regarding a course of action. This does not apply to a reclassification of an existing position. Former employees who are rehired at the University after a separation of over (90) days must complete a new Probationary Period.

N/A

Human Resources Service Team: 216 Mass Ave;; 617-373-2230; hrst@northeastern.edu
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources

Related Policies
N/A
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
New Employee Orientation Process
Keywords
Probationary Period; Probation
Version History
Last Revision Date: 2022-11-04
Issued: 2014-04-02
