Policy 803: Policy on Complimentary Admission for Student-Athletes


This policy addresses the provision of complimentary tickets to student-athletes in compliance with NCAA regulations. Admission to postseason games is not addressed in this policy.

Student-Athlete is a member of a team that participates on behalf of Northeastern University in NCAA sanctioned events.
Prospective Student Athlete is any student who has started classes in the ninth grade (seventh grade for Men’s Basketball). However, if a student has not started classes in the ninth grade, he/she becomes a prospect if the university provides the student (or student’s relatives or friends) any financial assistance or other benefit that the university does not provide to prospective students generally.

Each student-athlete may receive up to four complimentary admissions for each home or away regular season game in which the individual student-athlete participates. Complimentary admissions per student-athlete for away games are based on quantities available in accordance with the relevant game contract.
The student-athlete must designate the relationship of his/her guests prior to the game. Guests and/or event staff may not change complimentary admission guests designated by the student-athlete. For example, a student-athlete has his or her mother and father’s names on the pass list; however, the father cannot attend and the student-athlete’s sister arrives to attend in his place. The sister must purchase a ticket, and the father’s complimentary admission must not be used.
Hard tickets will not be issued for complimentary admission under this policy. A ticket stub or other identification of seating will be provided. All guests must show a photo ID and sign the pass list in order to receive their tickets.
Players must utilize the ARMS System to submit requests for complimentary tickets and designate the relationships of their guests. Requests must be submitted via ARMS:

FOR HOME GAMES: For weekday home games, the requests must be received at least 5 hours prior to the event. For weekend home games, the request must be received by noon on the Friday before the event.
FOR AWAY GAMES: For all away games, the request must be received by noon of the day prior to leaving campus.
ADMISSION FOR STUDENT-ATHLETES TO HOME EVENTS
Student-athletes must present their Husky ID card at the Student Sports Pass window at each event in order to gain access to the event. If the card is invalid for any reason, the student-athlete is required to purchase a ticket to gain admission to the event. All Student Sports Pass tickets are subject to availability.
ADMISSION FOR PROSPECTIVE STUDENT-ATHLETES
Official Visits: A prospective student-athlete may receive up to 3 complimentary admissions to a regular season, home athletic event during an official visit. The requesting coach must fill out an official visit admission form, which provides admission to the prospective student-athlete and their legal guardians or spouse only.
Unofficial Visits: A prospective student-athlete may up to receive 3 complimentary admissions to a regular season, home athletic event during an unofficial visit. The requesting coach must fill out an official visit admission form, which provides admission to the prospective student-athlete and two guests. The guests must have their relationship to the prospective student-athlete designated on the form.
These forms must be submitted to the Athletics Compliance Office for approval prior to admission being granted for the prospective student-athlete or their guests.

All ticket requests are based on availability and at the discretion of the Athletics Ticket Manager and Athletics Department. Requests must be approved by compliance and meet NCAA regulations
Athletics Ticket Manager at (617) 373-6785
Athletics Compliance Office at (617) 373-6399
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Athletics
Related Policies
Student Athlete Complimentary Admission
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Admission; Athletics; Sports; Events; Games
Version History
Last Revision Date: 2022-10-26
Issued: 2012-09-01
