Policy 402-CAN: Policy on Employment of Relatives (CAN)


To provide guidance on the employment of relatives of employees including job offers/appointments, transfers, and promotions.

A relative is defined as a spouse, common law partner, parent, child, sibling, grandparent, or grandchild of the employee. Relatives also include relationships arising out of marriage, such as stepchild or step-parent, or relationships that exist for those whose living arrangements approximate family arrangements.
A supervisor is a staff or faculty member who oversees, directs, or evaluates the work of others.
An employee is anyone employed by the university as a staff and/or faculty member.

The universitymakes staff and faculty appointments and advancements based on a candidate’s qualifications and on the basis of merit. The universitydoes not automatically bar from employment or advancement someone with meritorious qualities because a close relative of the individual happens to be in the employ of the university. The universitywill not appoint or make employment decisions about individuals because of a close family relationship with a member of the universityfaculty or staff.
Employment of relatives in the same department
If it is proposed that an individual may be appointed to a position in a department where his or her relative is employed, the hiring supervisor must contact HRM to review and determine if the potential for an actual or perceived conflict of interest exists. If the universitydecides to appoint the individual to a position in that department, HRM will assist in developing appropriate reporting relationships for the relatives.
The university’s Policy on Employment of relatives precludes individuals from evaluating the work performance of a relative, or making decisions concerning relatives regarding hiring, salary, or similar financial decisions.

Violations of this Policy on Employment of Relatives may result in disciplinary or other corrective actions, up to and including termination of employment for just cause.

HRM Customer Service Center: 617-373-2230; HRMInfo@northeastern.edu
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources

Related Policies
402: Policy on the Employment of Relatives
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
Policy on Employment of Relatives
Keywords
Employment of Relatives; Anti-nepotism
Version History
Last Revision Date:
Issued: September 1, 2016
