Policy 114: Policy on Signature Authority


This Policy establishes who among the University’s employees may sign agreements, contracts and other documents on behalf of Northeastern University. It applies to all agreements, contracts and other documents purporting to bind and/or to be entered on behalf of the University.

For the purposes of this policy, Signature Authority means the valid authority to legally bind the University by executing and signing agreements, contracts and other documents on behalf of the University.

As provided in the bylaws of the University and by vote of the Board of Trustees, only certain designated University officers may sign agreements and other documents on behalf of Northeastern University. These individuals are:
o The President o The Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs o The Chief Financial Officer o The Treasurer o The Assistant Treasurer
Any one of the above-named officers may delegate Signature Authority to another University employee provided that the delegation is in writing, that it defines the scope of the authority, and that it is on file with the Office of the Board of Trustees.
Delegations of Signature Authority are valid for no more than one year or until the individual to whom the authority is delegated no longer serves in the capacity or position noted in the delegation, whichever comes first. Delegations may be revoked at any time. No one other than the designated officers above may further delegate Signature Authority. (For example, if the Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs delegates the authority to sign faculty offer letters to a specific Dean, that Dean may not further delegate that authority to an assistant Dean or other University employee.)

University employees, students or other individuals who purport to sign documents on behalf of Northeastern University and who do not hold valid Signature Authority under this policy may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including separation from the University. In Canada, violation of this policy my constitute cause for termination. In addition, individuals who are not authorized to sign documents do so at their own risk and may be personally liable under the terms of the agreement signed and for any resulting legal action that may ensue, including potential civil and/or criminal proceedings as well as costs, expenses and legal fees associated with the document.
Verification or certification of Signature Authority can be obtained from the Office of the Board of Trustees, trustees.office@northeastern.edu.

Office of the Board of Trustees, trustees.office@northeastern.edu.
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Board of Trustees


Related Policies
Policy on the Legal Review of Proposed Contracts


Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Contracts; Agreements; Signature Authority; Legal Review; Contract Review
Version History
Last Revision Date: December 19, 2019
Issued: Approved by the Board of Trustees June 20, 2009 and in the Bylaws of the University
