Policy 406-CAN: Policy on Drug-Free Workplace (CAN)


Northeastern University strives to maintain a working, living, and learning environment that is free from the negative effects that alcohol and other drug use can create. Additionally, the university is committed to enforcing policies and laws relating to alcohol and other drug use. This policy applies to all campuses and university-owned or leased property, and to university- sponsored events off campus. It does not apply to the utilization of alcohol and drugs in approved research studies.

N/A

Northeastern University works to provide drug-free campuses and workplaces for all university employees and students.
The university supports the observance of all laws and regulations governing the use, purchase, and sale of alcohol. The unauthorized distribution, sale, or consumption of alcohol on university-owned or leased property is prohibited. Only legally authorized persons expressly permitted by the university may serve alcohol on campus.
The university strictly prohibits the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of illegal or unauthorized drugs in or on any Northeastern University property.
Educational programs and resources for faculty and staff, managers, and students are available through Human Resources.
No employee may report to work while under the influence of illegal drugs, non- prescribed drugs or alcohol or other intoxicants. In response to a breach of this policy by employees, the university will take appropriate action up to and including termination for just cause and/or require participation in an approved abuse assistance or rehabilitation program, subject to applicable human rights laws.

Federal laws consider possession, use, manufacture, distribution, and sale of illegal drugs and drug paraphernalia to be serious crimes. Depending upon the offence, conviction can lead to imprisonment, fines, and assigned community service.
Any university employee determined to have violated this policy may, subject to applicable human rights laws, be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination for just cause. Violation of the policy by employees directly engaged in the performance of a grant or contract can result in suspension of payments and/or termination of the contract, in addition to suspension or termination.

HR: Customer Service Center, 617-373-2230, HRST@northeastern.edu
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources
Related Policies
Code of Ethical Conduct
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
Policy on Drug-Free Workplace
Keywords
Drug-Free Workplace; Controlled Substances; Illegal Drugs; Drug Abuse; Alcohol Abuse; Federal Grant Compliance
Version History
Last Revision Date: May 17, 2022
Issued: September 1, 2016
