Policy 513: Policy on Tuition on Sponsored Awards


Tuition remission is an allowable expense on sponsored awards and supports the student and research mission of Northeastern University. This policy reinforces existing requirements that must be met when charging tuition on sponsored research.

N/A

To the maximum extent allowable by the funding agency, tuition costs must be charged to all externally sponsored grants and contracts. All tuition charges on sponsored awards must be consistent with the funding agency’s written policies and all applicable laws and regulations. Tuition remission and other forms of payment are an allowable cost to sponsored awards as long as the following criteria are met:
The sponsor has approved tuition as a direct cost as part of the sponsored research proposal budget. Allowability may vary depending on sponsoring agency (e.g., federal vs. non-federal).
The student must have an appointment letter, which requires full-time enrollment and academic good standing to maintain funding.
The student is enrolled in an advanced degree program and the activities of the student in relation to the award are related to the degree program.
The tuition or other payments are reasonable for the services performed. Tuition and fees are charged as a non-overhead-bearing direct cost.
Students who receive remuneration on sponsored awards are subject to annual certifications. Any questions about the applicability of tuition charges on sponsored awards should be raised with, and any waiver to this policy must be reviewed and approved by, the Vice Provost for Research Administration or their designee.

For federal requirements in the United States, see the Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (i.e., Uniform Guidance):
§200.466   Scholarships and student aid costs
§200.430 Compensation—personal services
Questions about tuition remission related to sponsored awards in Canada, United Kingdom, or other countries should be directed to the e-mail address listed below in Contact Information.
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Research Enterprise Services

Related Policies
Policy on Costs for Sponsored Agreements
Policy on Effort Reporting

Related Procedures
N/A

Supersedes
N/A

Keywords
Tuition, Sponsored Awards, Salary Support
Version History
Last Revision Date: N/A
Issued: July 14, 2025
