Policy 425: Policy on Retirement Benefits and Privileges


This policy defines eligibility criteria for receipt of retirement benefits from the University. This policy applies to all benefits eligible faculty and staff.


For the purposes of this policy,
Early retiree is any employee who is between the ages of 55 and 64, has at least 10 years of continuous benefits-eligible service immediately preceding the employee’s retirement date, and is in good standing with the university. Service is considered continuous if there is less than a three-month break in service.
Retiree is any employee who is 65 or older, has at least 10 years of continuous benefits-eligible service immediately preceding the employee’s retirement date, and is in good standing with the university. Service is considered continuous if there is less than a three-month break in service.

A – Early Retirees
Early Retirees who satisfy the retiree eligibility criteria above are eligible to continue participation in the university’s medical and dental plans after retirement.
The University will provide a fixed dollar premium contribution for individual or family medical coverage that is equal to 50% of the cost of the Core Plan. The University will contribute 50% of the total premium for Dental. The retiree will pay the remaining cost of the premiums.
The early retiree may participate in the university health and dental plans until age 65. At age 65, the early retiree must apply for coverage under Medicare.
When the early retiree reaches age 65 and transfers to Medicare, a spouse or domestic partner who is under age 65, and any eligible dependent children, may remain on the university medical/dental plans provided the retiree pays 100 percent of the premium.
A spouse or domestic partner may remain on the university medical/dental plans until age 65. At age 65, the spouse or domestic partner must transfer to Medicare.
Dependent children may remain on the university medical/dental plans until age 26. Current documentation of dependency is required.

B – Retirees
Retirees remain on the university medical/dental plans until the end of the month in which they retire and then transfer to Medicare. A spouse or domestic partner who is under age 65, and any eligible dependent children, may remain on the university medical/dental plans provided the retiree pays 100 percent of the premium.
A spouse or domestic partner may remain on the university medical/dental plans until age 65. At age 65, the spouse or domestic partner must transfer to Medicare.
Dependent children may remain on the university medical/dental plans until age 26. Current documentation of dependency is required.

C. Early Retiree/Retiree Benefits and Privileges:
Retiree identification card
Retiree Parking Pass which allows parking in University parking facilities
Library use
Northeastern University bookstore discounts
Use of Cabot Center Physical Education facilities during unscheduled hours
Marino Recreation Center & Badger/Rosen SquashBusters membership at the retiree rate
Use of university dining facilities
Two free tickets for each on-campus athletic event, dramatic production, musical and other student performance presented by the Center for the Arts
Full-tuition scholarship for two courses per academic term for a university retiree and/or spouse or domestic partner (provided a domestic partner certification form is on file with HRM Benefits)
Full-tuition scholarship to dependent children who qualify for admission to one of the programs leading to a degree in any of the university’s colleges or graduate schools. For complete details, please refer to the Tuition Waiver Program guidelines.
Occasional seminars sponsored by the university for retirees


Additional information regarding Retiree Benefits and Privileges can located on the Human Resources website.


HR Customer Service Center: 250 Columbus Place; 617-373-2230; hrminfo@northeastern.edu
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources

Related Policies
N/A
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes

Keywords
Retiree Benefits; Retirement
Version History
Last Revision Date: February 7, 2017
Issued: April 2, 2014
