Policy 704: Policy on Retention and Disposition of University Records


This policy and its implementing procedures will assist the University to meet its obligations under various laws and regulations on the retention of specific records, as well as to optimize the use of storage space and minimize the cost of record retention.
This policy applies to all University records, and to all Northeastern University faculty, administrators, and staff who manage or maintain University records.

University Records means the original of any records created or received by Northeastern employees in the course of university business. These records can exist in any form. Records include paper and electronic documents (including e-mail), microforms, audio and video recordings, databases, and emails. Some examples of records include, but are not limited to, contracts, minutes, correspondence, memoranda, financial records, published materials, photographs, sound recordings, video recordings, drawings and maps, and computer data.

Official Repository means the department that has primary responsibility for the specific record. It is designated as having responsibility for retention and timely destruction or transfer to the University Archives of particular types of official University records. Responsibility is assigned to the administrative manager or a designee of the unit that created the record.

Northeastern must retain different types of records for specific periods of time. University records and documents must be adequately maintained until they are no longer needed or are of no value, including historic value, and so may be disposed of at the appropriate time and in the appropriate manner.

The University has designated official repositories for record maintenance. Departments with the primary responsibility for specific records are designated as official repositories.

The Record Retention Schedule sets forth the retention period for each specific record. The current Northeastern University Record Retention Schedule can be accessed here (requires a Northeastern username to access).

Call the Office of General Counsel, (617) 373-2157, if you have questions about document-retention periods on the document retention schedule. If you have any questions about records management and disposition, please contact the Records Management Team.
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Office of Data Administration
Related Policies
Appropriate Use Policy
Library Archives Policies
Related Procedures
Record Retention Schedule (requires a Northeastern username to access)
Process and Procedure for University Record Retention Schedule
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Records Retention; Records Storage; Records Management; Records Destruction; Archives; Shredding; Department Files
Version History
Last Revision Date: December 1, 2023
Issued: June 6, 2001
