Policy 801: Policy on Athletics Complimentary Admission


This policy applies to all complimentary admission to all on-campus athletic events.


N/A

The President may receive up to four complimentary tickets for all ticketed sporting events. All requests should be made to the Athletics Ticket Office at least 48 hours in advance.
The Director of Athletics will receive ticket quantities as needed.
All Full-Time Athletic Department Staff members may receive two complimentary season tickets for each home regular season sporting event. All ticket requests for individual games must be placed at least 48 hours prior to the event by contacting the Athletics Ticket Manager. All requests will be fulfilled based on availability.
Head Coaches will receive twenty complimentary season tickets for their own sport and will follow the procedure for full-time athletic department personnel for all other sports.
Assistant Coaches will receive six complimentary season tickets for their own sport and will follow the procedure for full-time athletic department personnel for all other sports.
Part-Time Coaches and Graduate Assistant Coaches will receive two complimentary season tickets for each sport including their own.
Tickets used for charitable contributions will be handled on an individual basis. A written request must be submitted to Athletics Ticket Manager or the Compliance Office at least one week prior to the event. This letter must include the following information: name of organization, contact person, 501(C)(3) tax id number, the quantity of tickets being requested, and purpose of ticket use. The Athletics Compliance office must approve before any request will be processed.
Requests for tickets from university employees will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
Under no circumstances will a professional scout receive complimentary ticketed admission to an event. All scouts must contact the coach or media services to arrange admission prior to the event or purchase a ticket at the event box office.
High School, travel or town teams that wish to attend an event must contact the coaching staff and provide a full roster identifying all athletes and coaches that will be in attendance. The coaching staff must fill out all of the necessary paperwork with the Compliance Office, which in turn will provide approval and make the request to the ticket office. All submissions must be made at least 48 hours prior to the event.
Playoffs, Tournaments and NCAA Championship events will be handled in accordance with NCAA regulations.

All ticket requests will be fulfilled based on event availability and at the discretion of the Athletics Ticket Manager and Athletics Department.
Athletics Ticket Manager at (617) 373-6785 Athletics Compliance Office at (617) 373-6399
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Athletics
Related Policies
Policy on Complimentary Admission for Student-Athletes
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Tickets, Admission, Athletics, Sports, Events, Games
Version History
Last Revision Date: 2022-10-26
Issued: 2012-09-01
