Policy 503: Policy on Openness in Research


In keeping with its mission to educate students for a life of fulfillment and accomplishment, and to create and translate knowledge to meet global and societal needs, Northeastern University is committed to the principles of open scholarly exchange of ideas and academic freedom, including broad access to research data and results.
This policy applies to research conducted at Northeastern University by faculty, students, staff and visiting researchers.

N/A

The University will not undertake research with restrictions on openness or academic freedom on its campus. Examples of unacceptable restrictions include classification, required external approval of research results before publication, or exclusion of members of the University community from participation in research. In particular, foreign faculty, students, or scholars should not be singled out for restriction in access to the University’s educational and research activities.
Most research can be conducted in accordance with this policy and with the ideals of freedom of inquiry and open exchange of knowledge. The University recognizes that, in a few compelling instances, the best interests of society will weigh against broad participation in research and open exchange of information. In such cases, the Senior Vice Provost for Research may grant exceptions to this policy. Exceptions will be rare and will require that the research is critically important to the University’s mission and serves a demonstrable greater good.

University facilities shall not be used for research that violates this policy.

Senior Vice Provost for Research (617) 373-8665
Northeastern University Research Enterprise Services (617) 373-5600

Responsible Office/Department(s)
NU-RES

Related Policies
Policy on the Responsible Conduct of Research
Policy on Export Control
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Classified; Secret; Freedom of Access; Dissemination; Public Access; Publication; Restriction on Participation; Prohibition on Disclosure
Version History
Last Revision Date: December 7, 2022
Issued: January 1, 2008
