Policy 616: Oakland Campus Access Policy


Northeastern is committed to providing a safe and secure environment for the university community, visitors, and guests, as well as to safeguarding university assets, including property. Northeastern University is a private institution that retains the right to determine the policies and protocols regarding access to university property and premises, and the use of campus facilities. The Oakland campus in particular is a residential campus, which contains research spaces (restricted areas) and childcare and primary education facilities (covered locations) for the general community.

The purpose of this policy is to:
Establish the conditions for accessing university property;
Enumerate the expectations of occupants of university property; and
Identify the conditions under which individuals may be removed from university property.
This policy applies to all members of the university community including but not limited to students, employees, contractors, vendors, visitors, and guests. This policy applies to all university property, land, buildings, facilities, campuses, and open spaces in Oakland, California.

Department of Public Safety (DPS) is the Northeastern University’s Public safety operation on the Oakland campus, including full-time staff, and contracted security officers or other personnel assisting.
Government Issued ID includes state or provincial Driver’s License or Identification Card, Passport or Passport Card, Military ID card, or Permanent Resident Card.
Husky Card is the Northeastern University Identification Card issued to students, faculty, staff, alumni, contractors, conference attendees, orientation attendees and others, at the discretion of the university.

A. General

The campus and its property are not public facilities. Northeastern University may, at its sole discretion, deny members of the public access at any time for any reason not prohibited by law, including but not limited to university business, public safety, and/or to accommodate university or private events.
All persons should be prepared to present a Husky Card or a Government Issued ID at the request of a Department of Public Safety employee (including contracted security services), other university public safety officials, or other authorized university official. In the absence of a government issued identification, public safety officials may accept a valid school identification card so long as it contains a photo of the individual and their legal name. Failure to produce acceptable identification upon request may result in denial of entry.


B. Campus Access

The university requires that all members of the university community, including but not limited to employees, students, affiliates, guests, and visitors abide by all campus access policies and protocols. The university reserves the right to rescind access privileges to any person who is violating or has violated university policy, protocol, procedure, practice, or applicable laws or regulations, regardless of whether the person is affiliated with the university.

C. Campus Access Control and Oversight

The Department of Public Safety (DPS) is the designated function on the Oakland campus responsible for maintaining a safe and secure campus environment for the community, including permitting access to university property, premises, and facilities, in collaboration with the Departments of Facilities, Student Life, and other appropriate campus departments.
All keys or identification cards issued by the university shall remain the property of the university. All persons must return university issued key(s), identification card(s), and university credentials along with other university property prior to separating from employment with the university. Any temporary credentials issued for the purpose of a visit to campus must be returned upon completion of the visit.
Anyone granted a Northeastern key, identification card, or other university credentials is responsible for reporting loss or theft to DPS as soon as reasonably possible.


D. Disruptive and/or Unauthorized Activity

Department of Public Safety personnel have discretion to remove any person engaging in disruptive and/or unauthorized activities. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:
Activities which disrupt the educational process, programs, or interfere with the business or activities of the university
A use of space which conflicts with university policy and/or the purpose of a reservation of that space.
Use of space for non-instructional programs or activities without campus organization sponsorship consistent with university policy, rentals, or other authorized use
Use of space which violates local, state, or federal laws, or Northeastern University policies or protocols.

E. Enforcement

The Department of Public Safety is responsible for enforcement of this policy. Failure to leave campus when requested by DPS may result in further action by local law enforcement, the issuance of a Trespass Notice, and/or other appropriate action. Once an individual or organization has been declared as trespassed, they may not return to campus without express written authorization from the appropriate university official.
Any trespassed person or organization found on Northeastern University property may be deemed to be unlawfully trespassing and may be removed by public safety or law enforcement officials. Violations that result in trespass notices may be further enforced or adjudicated by local law enforcement.

F. Vehicles

Individuals driving to the campus may be required to register their vehicle with the Department of Public Safety prior to entering the campus. The university reserves the right to remove unapproved, unregistered, abandoned, or illegally parked vehicles from its property.


G. Emergency Alerts and Response

In the event of an emergency, individuals on campus are required to follow all instructions issued by Department of Public Safety officials and other responders.
H. Animals

Animal waste from dogs or other animals being walked on campus must immediately be picked up by the animal’s owner or handler and disposed of in trash containers. Animals that are disruptive or demonstrate aggressive behavior are prohibited from campus. Dogs must remain on a leash at all times and be in the control of their handler. Animals are not allowed inside buildings or facilities, unless approved by the appropriate university official.
This section on animals does not apply to service animals or assistance animals, as those terms are used in federal and California state law, and in university policy.

As a condition of access to the university property, all individuals are required to adhere to all local, state, and federal laws as well as all university policies including but not limited to those found at https://policies.northeastern.edu/.
The possession of weapons or firearms is prohibited on university property, unless it has been explicitly approved by Department of Public Safety. Individuals entering university property are required to comply with California law and university Policy 604 – Weapons on Campus.
Northeastern University is a drug and tobacco and smoke free university. Individuals entering university property are required to comply with 406 – Policy on Drug-Free Workplace and 607 – Policy on Tobacco and Smoke-Free Campus.
Oakland Campus Director of Public Safety
(510) 430-5555
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Department of Public Safety

Related Policies

406 – Policy on Drug-Free Workplace
600 – Policy on Keys and Keycards
601 – Policy on Husky Cards
604 – Weapons on Campus
607 – Policy on Tobacco and Smoke-Free Campus
608 – Policy on Background Checks for Contractors and Vendors
Undergraduate Handbook: Identification Cards, University Regulations
Graduate Handbook: Identification Cards; Academic Policies and Procedures
Housing Guest Policy

Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Oakland, Access, Trespass, Security, ID
Version History
Last Revision Date: N/A
Issued: April 18, 2023
