Policy 101: Code of Ethical Conduct


Northeastern University encourages and expects all members of the community to conduct themselves according to the highest ethical standards. All of our endeavors – including research, academic, business, athletic, community relations and student affairs – must be grounded in ethical principles, conducted according to the utmost standards of integrity, and carried out in compliance with legal and regulatory requirements and university policies. The core principles articulated in this code encompass the values that underlie all university activities and inform our decision making.
This Code of Ethical Conduct applies to Northeastern University trustees, officers, faculty, staff, students, and also volunteers and agents when they speak or act on behalf of the university.
N/A

A. Compliance with Laws, Rules, and Regulations
Following the law, both in letter and in spirit, and doing the right thing, are the foundations on which the university’s ethical standards rest. In carrying out our official responsibilities, or otherwise conducting business or activities associated with the university, we are all expected to comply with applicable laws, regulations, and university policies. Guidance from a designated university office, department, or supervisor should be sought wherever there is a question regarding lawful or ethical behavior and practices, and/or legal or other compliance matters.

B. Good Faith Conduct and Accountability
All of us are expected to be truthful in our work, words and actions, and to act in good faith in connection with university endeavors. This includes being familiar with and following university policies and procedures, and taking responsibility for our own part in upholding the university’s standards and reputation for integrity.

C. Respect for the Rights and Dignity of Others
Northeastern University is an institution dedicated to the pursuit of excellence and facilitation of an environment that fosters this goal. Central to that institutional commitment is the principle of treating others civilly and professionally. The university values the safety, privacy, property, personal rights and dignity of others. It endeavors to promote a community free from illegal or inappropriate conduct, including threats, violence, harassment, intimidation, coercion, and discrimination.

D. Avoiding Conflicts of Interest
All members of the university community are expected to avoid actions or engagements that are in conflict with their position, or that create the appearance of a conflict of interest between personal and/or external interests and the interests of the university. That means, among other things, that they should avoid situations where a financial or other consideration may compromise or appear to compromise their ability to carry out their responsibilities to the university.
Trustees and employees must report potential conflicts, may not use their position for personal advantage, and may not engage in supplemental activities that undermine their ability to perform their jobs for the university.

E. Protection and Proper Use of University Assets
We are all required to maintain the confidentiality of nonpublic university information, records, and data entrusted to us, except when disclosure is authorized by an appropriate official of the university and/or authorized or required by law. We are likewise required to safeguard university property and other assets, and to use them responsibly and properly — that is, within the accepted parameters of use and permissions. Unauthorized access, use or disclosure of university records or assets, including but not limited to misappropriation, forgery, and falsification or fraudulent alteration of university records, are all prohibited.

A. Reporting Known or Suspected Violations
University trustees and officers are required to report promptly any known or suspected violations of this Code to the Chairman of the Board or Vice President of Audit and Advisory Services. All other members of the community should report concerns to a supervisor, manager, dean, director or department head, as appropriate. Northeastern University also uses an independent third party company, EthicsPoint, to provide an anonymous compliance “hotline” for all members of the university community. For more information or to make a report, click here https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/32115/index.html.

B. Seek Specific Guidance
More detailed university policies, such as the Code of Student Conduct, Academic Integrity Policy, Faculty Handbook, Equal Opportunity Policy, and Professional Standards and Business Conduct Policies, which address specific situations and have specific applicability, rest on the above principles. Of course, no code or policy can be expected to include every possible set of circumstances. We all have the responsibility to seek guidance and clarification from the appropriate office, department or supervisor for any questions pertaining to compliance with laws, policies, or these ethical principles. For additional training on the Code of Ethical Conduct, please click here: https://northeastern.instructure.com/courses/555.

C. Non-Retaliation
The university will not tolerate retaliation or discrimination against anyone who makes a good faith report of a suspected violation of law, regulation, or university policy, including this Code of Ethical Conduct. All reports submitted to EthicsPoint are protected under the Whistleblower Policy.


Compliance Department, (617) 373-6653 Office of Audit and Advisory Services, (617) 373-4041 University Ombuds, (617) 373-3362 EthicsPoint Reporting Line: 1-855-350-9390
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Compliance Department
Human Resources
Related Policies
Policy on Conflict of Interest and Commitment Whistleblower Policy Policy on Appropriate Use of Computer and Network Resources Policy on Professional Standards and Business Conduct Policy on Research Misconduct Policy on Equal Opportunity Student Code of Conduct Faculty Handbook Academic Integrity Policy Policy and Procedures on Financial Conflicts of Interest in Public Health Service Funded Research
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Code of Ethics; Ethical Conduct; Integrity; Professional Standards; Business Conduct; Compliance
Version History
Last Revised: 2022-10-26
Issued: 2014-03-21
