Policy 607: Policy on Tobacco and Smoke-Free Campus


Northeastern University strives to provide safe and health environment in which to teach, learn, research, live, and work. The University recognizes that:
Smoking is a major cause of preventable disease;
That a tobacco and smoke-free university is consistent with the University’s mission and purpose; and that
A tobacco and smoke-free university will improve individual and community health.
This policy applies to all persons, including all students, faculty, staff, volunteers, contractors, vendors and visitors, anywhere on university property and in university vehicles, buildings and facilities on all campuses, including parking lots, green spaces, and pedestrian walkways.

For purposes of this policy:
Northeastern University shall mean all locations, campuses, buildings and outdoor areas owned and/or operated by the University.
Tobacco and smoking-related products means any type of tobacco or smoking-related products intended to mimic tobacco products or the smoking or vaping of any other substance. This includes, but is not limited to cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, smokeless tobacco, electronic cigarettes, pipes, vaping pens, bidis, hookahs, chewing tobacco and snuff. This does not include cessation tools such as nicotine gum or patches.
University Vehicle means any vehicle that is owned, leased, or rented and used for transportation for university business and includes the driver and all passengers.

Use of any tobacco or smoking-related products is prohibited at Northeastern University, consistent with applicable law and University policy.
Additionally, the possession or use of cannabis, cannabinoids, marijuana or other controlled substances on university property is prohibited.

It is the responsibility of all members of the community to comply with this policy, and it is expected that both smokers and nonsmokers will cooperate in the implementation of the policy in an atmosphere of mutual respect and consideration. All members of the University community are encouraged, if comfortable, to promote compliance with this policy by reminding students, faculty, staff, volunteers, contractors, vendors and visitors of the prohibition of use of tobacco and smoking-related products at Northeastern University, as necessary.
Any individual in violation of this policy may be subject to disciplinary action. Faculty and staff in violation of this policy may be reported to the individual’s supervisor. Students in violation of this policy may be reported to the Office of Student Conduct and Conflict Resolutions. Contractors/Vendors in violation may be reported to Facilities Administration or Compliance. Violations by visitors may be reported to the office hosting the visitor, if known.
Indoor air quality issues associated with tobacco smoke in Northeastern facilities may be reported to Facilities Customer Service.
General comments, suggestions, and concerns may be reported to the Safety Leadership Counsel.
Consistent with applicable law and University policy, appropriate signage is placed throughout Northeastern University indicating the University’s prohibition of use of tobacco and smoking-related products. Such signage or the lack thereof shall not limit or otherwise impact the applicability or scope of this policy.
Information and educational materials about the health and safety concerns related to smoking, as well as resources to aid in smoking cessation are available through University Health and Counseling Services for students and Human Resources for faculty and staff.
Additionally, the following public resources are available
Information for the United States
Information for Canada
Information for United Kingdom

Office of Student Conduct and Conflict Resolution, (617) 373-4390.
University Health and Counseling Services, (617) 373-2772.
Facilities Customer Service: Work Request Form
Safety Leadership Council: marn.smith@northeastern.edu
Human Resources: General Inquiries
Northeastern University Police, (617)-373-2121
Northeastern Employee Assistance Program, 800-624 5544 (Use company code “Northeastern University”)

Responsible Office/Department(s)
Facilities Services
Human Resources
Safety Leadership Council

Related Policies
Policy on Professional Standards and Business Conduct
Whistleblower Policy
Policy on Drug-Free Workplace
Code of Student Conduct
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Smoking; Nonsmoking; Smoke-free; Tobacco-free
Version History
Last Revision Date: September 6, 2022
Issued: August 12, 2013
