Policy 601: Policy on Husky Cards


This policy clarifies eligibility for and use of Northeastern University issued Husky Cards. The Northeastern Husky Card is the official identification card of the university.

N/A

The Husky Card may be issued to students, faculty, staff, alumni, contractors, conference attendees, orientation attendees and others, at the discretion of the university. Any person seeking to obtain a Husky Card must contact the Husky Card Office to request their card.
No person shall have more than one active Husky Card at a time. No person shall use a Husky Card other than their own for any purpose. Any person found using a card other than their own may be subject to discipline up to and including termination. In Canada, violation of this policy my constitute cause for termination. The University may deny the issuance of a Husky Card for any reason it deems necessary.
A non-expired government-issued photo ID, such as a license or passport, must be presented to receive a Husky Card. Cardholders must report lost or stolen cards to Northeastern University Police Department (NUPD). A fee may be assessed to replace a lost or stolen card.

For additional information on the uses of the Husky Card please visit the Husky Card website.

Husky Card Office 4 Speare Commons Speare Hall
Office Hours: Monday – Thursday 8:30AM – 7:00PM Friday 8:30AM – 5:00PM
Telephone: Voice: 617.373.8740 Fax: 617.373.8794
E-mail: General questions: huskycard@neu.edu Husky lock questions: huskylocks@northeastern.edu
Mail: Northeastern University Husky Card Office 4 Speare Commons Speare Hall 360 Huntington Avenue Boston, MA 02115-5000

Responsible Office/Department(s)
Husky Card Office

Related Policies
Meal Plan Policy
Library Circulation Policy
Access Policy
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Swipe Card; Access; Meal Plan; Husky Dollars; Dining Dollars; Print Bucks; Laundry Bucks; ID Card; Library
Version History
Last Revision Date: December 18, 2019
Issued: November 1, 2013
