Policy 417: Policy on Timekeeping and Reporting


Time records constitute the basis for payment of wages and of university-authorized paid time off. This policy addresses compliance with applicable federal and state laws related to accurate and timely recording and reporting of time worked to promote the efficient processing of payroll. This policy applies to all employees for the recording and reporting of all time off, paid or unpaid, and to non-exempt employees for the recording and reporting of actual hours worked.

For purposes of this policy,
Paid time off is university-authorized accrued vacation, sick time, holidays and other compensated time off.
Non-exempt employees refers to employees who are subject to the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and are entitled to overtime pay for all hours worked over 40.

It is the policy of the university to comply with applicable wage and hour laws. Employees and their supervisors share responsibility for accurately accounting for time off in the week taken.
All employees must accurately report paid time off, paid or unpaid, to their supervisors or designees.
All staff who are paid hourly and are eligible to earn overtime must confirm time worked and submit timesheets every week once the work week is completed.
All faculty and staff who have direct reports must review and approve the timesheets of their direct reports each week.
All time off, paid or unpaid, as well as time worked for non-exempt employees, must be recorded in the Time Tracking system.
All employee absences due to illness of more than five (5) days must be reported to Human Resources (Leaves) by the employee, supervisor or their designee.

Any employee who knowingly, and through any means, inaccurately reports time spent working or time off, paid or unpaid, is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
Overtime compensation is paid consistent with applicable laws.

For questions and/or for more information about this Policy, please contact:
Human Resources: 216 Mass Ave; (617) 373-2230; hrst@northeastern.edu
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources

Related Policies
Holiday Pay
Standard Business Hours
Department and Staff Work Schedules
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes

Keywords
Time Tracking; Attendance; Absences; Paid Time Off; Overtime Compensation
Version History
Last Revision Date: December 19, 2022
Issued: April 2, 2014
