Policy 604: Policy on Weapons on Campus


Northeastern University is committed to providing a safe and secure environment in which to study, research, live, work and visit. In support of this commitment, the university prohibits the possession and use of firearms and/or other dangerous weapons on university-owned and -leased property and at university-sponsored events and activities, except as otherwise specified in this policy. The purpose of this policy is to describe the types of weapons prohibited by the university, outline circumstances in which exceptions are or may be authorized and identify reporting obligations and resources available to the university community.
This policy applies to all faculty, staff, students, and visitors, and to all activities undertaken on any property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the university, whether administered by the university or not; or while participating in university-sponsored activities off university-owned or controlled property unless otherwise specified in this policy.

For purposes of this policy,


A. Firearm

Means any item statutorily classified as such and/or any pistol, revolver, rifle, smoothbore arm from which a shot, bullet, or pellet can be discharged by whatever means, including BB guns, air guns, paintball guns, or other projectile devices.

B. Dangerous Weapon

Means:
1. Any item that, by its nature, is capable of causing serious injury or death, including but not limited to firearms, long bows, crossbows, knives, stiletto dagger, daggers, switch knives, double edge knives, ballistic knives, knives with a detachable blade capable of being propelled, metallic knuckles, black jacks, blow guns, sling shots, nunchaku, zoobow, kung fu sticks, throwing stars, leather armbands or other clothing that has metallic spikes, points, or studs, explosives, explosive agents of any kind, tear gas, or other dangerous weapons or articles; and any item that is statutorily classified as such in the jurisdiction (such as oleoresin capsicum spray, pepper spray, or mace in the United Kingdom); and
2. Any item, even if not inherently dangerous, when used in a dangerous fashion such that it reasonably appears to be capable of causing serious injury or death (e.g., a tool used in an assault).

A. General Policy Statement

1. Unless otherwise stated in this policy, the university prohibits the use, possession or sale of firearms, whether loaded or unloaded:
a. On property owned or controlled by the university, including but not limited to in offices, laboratories and residence hall rooms;
b. At university-sponsored events or on university-sponsored activities;
c. By anyone other than the individuals identified in and in the circumstances described in this policy, even if the person has a legal license or permit to carry the firearm.
2. The university prohibits the use, sale or possession of all other dangerous weapons, including replicas, except as permitted by this policy.
3. The university will comply with all relevant and applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances pertaining to the possession and use of weapons.

B. Exceptions

1. Law Enforcement/Security/Military Personnel

Authorized law enforcement officers, security officers contracted by Northeastern University, armored vehicle security personnel, or military personnel, in performance of their official duties, and to the extent that they are legally permitted to possess weapons in the jurisdiction in which they are located, are authorized to possess firearms or other dangerous weapons on university property. For the purposes of this policy, this includes members of the university’s Department of Military Science who are actively participating in Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program and participants in an authorized police academy hosted by the Northeastern University Police Department.

2. University-Sanctioned Groups/Events

University-sanctioned groups or events where a weapon is required as part of the curriculum or activity, including dramatic performances, athletic competitions such as fencing, or ceremonies involving an honor or color guard, must request authorization from the Northeastern University Police Department (NUPD) Chief of Police or designee to possess and/or use the appropriate weapon, which request must be approved in writing prior to the event. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the NUPD Chief of Police as part of the exception approval, such weapons must be inert replicas or working weapons which have been rendered inert. Weapons rendered as inert will be required to be transported in bags or boxes while on university property. Ceremonial swords will be carried in conformance with the applicable branch of service’s regulations. The NUPD Chief of Police or designee may impose additional requirements or conditions on any possession or use of weapons approved through this process.

C. Obligation to Report
Any member of the university community who observes an individual possessing or using a weapon contrary to this policy should immediately report the activity to the appropriate contact as listed in Section V of this policy.

D. Requests for Exceptions

Requests for exceptions to this policy must be made in writing to the NUPD Chief of Police or designee. The NUPD Chief of Police or designee will review the request in consultation with appropriate university officials and will respond with a decision. Possession of a weapon, as defined in this policy, is not permitted while a request for an exception is pending.

E. Sanctions

Weapons in violation of this policy may be confiscated by the NUPD, security officers employed by NUPD or municipal law enforcement and violators may be subject to removal from campus, termination from employment, referral for student disciplinary action, including suspension or separation, and/or criminal prosecution.

Violations of this policy may also constitute violations of state law. For example, Massachusetts law prohibits anyone from carrying a firearm in any building or any grounds of a college or university campus. Under North Carolina law, it is a felony to possess or carry any gun, rifle, pistol or other firearm of any kind on educational property. Violations of weapons laws are reported under federal and state law.
Contact For:
Office Name
Phone Number
Email Address
To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in Massachusetts
University Police Department
(617) 373-2121
(Non-Emergency)

(617) 373-3333
(Emergency)
N/A
To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in California
Department of
Public Safety
(510) 430-5555
N/A
To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in London
CEO of the London Campus (Non- Emergency)





University Police Department



Metropolitan Police Department (Met)
(Emergency)
+44.020.7637.4550









(617) 373-2121





+44.20.7601.2222
N/A
To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in Maine
Dean and Chief Administrative Officer of Northeastern
University, Portland (Non-Emergency)

Portland Police (Emergency)
(207) 376-9960






9-1-1
N/A
To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in North Carolina


Regional Dean and CEO of the Charlotte Campus (Non- Emergency)


Charlotte- Mecklenburg Police Department
(Emergency)
(980) 224-8468




9-1-1

To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in Toronto
Regional Dean and CEO of the Toronto Campus (Non- Emergency)
(888) 660-6938

N/A
To report violations of this policy and/or weapons law violations in Vancouver
Regional Dean
and CEO of the Vancouver Campus (Non-Emergency)


Vancouver Police Department (Emergency)
(778) 783-0609




(604) 717-2850
N/A
Questions regarding administrative enforcement of this policy and related policies in the Student Code of Conduct
Office of Student Conduct and Conflict
Resolution
(617) 373-4390
N/A
Questions regarding administrative enforcement of this policy for faculty and staff
Human Resources
Department
(617) 373-2230
N/A

Responsible Office/Department(s)
University Police
Related Policies
Code of Ethical Conduct
Policy on Workplace Violence
Student Code of Conduct
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Firearms; Guns; Weapons; Knives
Version History
Last Revision Date: September 8, 2023
Issued: January 1, 1975
