Policy 605: Policy on Workplace Violence


To define and establish a policy on workplace violence.

Violence, threats of violence, hostile behavior harassment, intimidation, damage to workplace property.

Northeastern University is committed to promoting a safe workplace for all faculty, staff, students and visitors. It is the university’s policy to create a workplace free from violence, threats of violence, harassment, intimidation and other disruptive behavior.
Northeastern University will not tolerate violence or the threats of violence in the workplace. The university expressly prohibits violence, threats of violence, hostile behavior, harassment, intimidation, on or off campus, or damage to university property. Violence or threatening behavior can include physical acts of violence, gestures, intimidating presence, oral, written or electronic statements, sexual assaults and weapons possession whether on or off campus.
The university will take appropriate action in response to reports of such incidents, which may include, but is not limited to, disciplinary action up to and including termination and /or criminal prosecution.
This Policy does not address allegations of Prohibited Offenses in violation of Title IX which are governed by the Policy on Rights and Responsibilities Under Title IX. That Policy also provides separate procedures that outline reporting options and explain how the university assesses, investigates and resolves reports of Prohibited Offenses involving students.

Faculty and staff play a major role in the university’s efforts by complying with this policy and treating all threats seriously and reporting incidents immediately.
It is the responsibility of all managers and supervisors to report acts of workplace violence to HR/NUPD, including violent, threatening, harassing, intimating or other disruptive behaviors. Faculty and Staff are expected to report any conduct that is inappropriate and/or causes concern.
Imminent threats, violent incidents, or dangerous or emergency situations should be reported immediately to Northeastern University Police Department (NUPD).
Verbal abuse, perceived intimidation, harassment or other non-emergency situations should be reported immediately to the immediate supervisor, manager, the Office of University Equity and Compliance and/or Human Resources. For all other situations, contact Human Resources or NUPD.

Human Resources: 216 Mass Ave; (617) 373-2230; hrst@northeastern.edu
NUPD: 617-373-2121
Office of University Equity and Compliance: 617-373-4644

Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources

Related Policies
N/A
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Workplace; Violence; Harassment; Threats
Version History
Last Revision Date: December 19, 2022
Issued: April 2, 2014
