Policy 103: Policy on Professional Standards and Business Conduct


Northeastern University is committed to operating within the highest standards of integrity and ethics, and to fostering a culture of compliance with legal and regulatory requirements and university policies in all its activities. Faculty and staff have an obligation to perform their responsibilities in a manner that supports and advances the university’s mission, goals, and ethical standards.
This policy applies to all Northeastern University faculty and staff.

N/A
All faculty and staff are required to comply with all applicable university policies including, without limitation, the Code of Ethical Conduct, applicable Human Resources policies, and the core compliance policies listed within each section below.
A. Compliance with Laws, Rules, and Regulations
Code of Ethical Conduct
Policy on Student Rights Under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
Policy on Drug-Free Workplace
Policy on Environmental Health & Safety
Policy on Export Control
Policy on Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
B. Good Faith Conduct and Accountability
The university expects all employees to be truthful, to act in good faith in university endeavors, and to take responsibility for their actions.
Whistleblower Policy
Policy on Political Campaign and Lobbying Activity
Policy on Use of University Social Media Accounts
C. Respect for the Rights and Dignity of Others
All faculty and staff are expected to treat other members of the community with respect and professionalism. Illegal or inappropriate workplace threats, violence, harassment, intimidation, coercion, and discrimination are prohibited.
Policy on Equal Opportunity
Policy on Sexual and Gender-Based Harassment and Title IX
Policy on Non-Fraternization
Policy on Tobacco and Smoke-Free Campus
Policy on Appropriate Use of Computer and Network Resources
Policy on Workplace Violence
D. Avoiding Conflicts of Interest
All employees are expected to avoid actions or engagements that are in conflict with their position, and must report potential conflicts, whether financial, personal, or potential “appearance of conflict” issues. Employees may not use their position for personal advantage.
Policy on Conflict of Interest and Commitment
Policy on Gift Acceptance
Policy on Endorsements and Use of University Identifiers
E. Protection and Proper Use of University Assets
Faculty and staff must maintain the confidentiality of nonpublic university information, records and data entrusted to them.
Policy on Confidentiality of University Records and Information
All employees must safeguard and respect university property and resources, and report fraud, waste and abuse.
Policy on Signature Authority
Whistleblower Policy
Policy on Use of University Funds
Policy on Appropriate Use of Computer and Network Resources
Policy on Retention and Disposition of University Record
Policy on Asset Disposition
Policy on Handling Payments Made to the University
The university expects all faculty, including part-time faculty, and all staff to adhere to and act in accordance with this policy, and to be familiar and comply with the current version of all applicable university policies, including those specifically listed above. Failure to comply may lead to disciplinary action up to termination, or the pursuit of civil or criminal proceedings as appropriate.
The university retains the right to issue, amend, or withdraw a university policy at any time.
Human Resources (617) 373-2230; hrst@northeastern.edu Compliance: compliance@northeastern.edu Finance (617) 373-2240 Audit and Advisory Services (617) 373-4041 ITS (617) 373-4357 Office for University Equity and Compliance (617) 373-4644 Environmental Health and Safety (617) 373-2769 Marketing and Communications (617) 373-5470 Government Relations (617) 373-8528
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Human Resources
Related Policies
Code of Ethical Conduct
Faculty Handbook
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Behavior; Conduct; Ethics; Compliance; Environment; Conflicts of Interest; Gifts; Confidentiality; Endorsements; Vendors; Appropriate Use (Computers); Property; Records; Signature Authority; Contracts; Relationships; Sexual Harassment; Whistleblowers; Political Activity; Use of Funds
Version History
Last Revision Date: April 13, 2023
Issued: January 1, 2002
