Policy 109: Whistleblower Policy


Northeastern University strives to operate in an ethical, honest, and lawful manner and expects its faculty, administrators, staff and students to conduct their activities in accordance with university policies and applicable law.
This policy applies to all members of the university community.

N/A

The University strongly encourages all faculty, administrators, staff and students to report suspected or actual wrongful conduct through channels that the University establishes for such reporting.
No University faculty, administrator, staff or student may interfere with the good faith reporting of suspected or actual wrongful conduct; no individual who makes such a good faith report shall be subject to retaliation, including harassment or any adverse employment, academic or educational consequence, as a result of making a report. The University will take whatever action is necessary and appropriate to address a violation of this policy. Approved by the Board of Trustees on November 10, 2022.

All members of the University community may also submit any concerns confidentially and anonymously to the Compliance Hotline, which is managed by EthicsPoint, an independent third-party company. To report a concern to EthicsPoint, call 1-855- 350-9390 or go to northeastern.ethicspoint.com.
Individuals may also report concerns directly to the relevant government agency or ministry.

For questions about this policy or for information about established channels for reporting wrongful conduct and/or compliance concerns, including anonymous reporting, please contact the Audit and Advisory Services (617-373-4041) or the Office of the General Counsel (617-373-2157).
Responsible Office/Department(s)
Board of Trustees

Related Policies
Code of Ethical Conduct
Policy on Professional Standards and Business Conduct
Related Procedures
N/A
Supersedes
N/A
Keywords
Misconduct; Conflict of Interest; Reporting Concerns; Whistleblower; Retaliation
Version History
Last Revision Date: November 10, 2022
Issued: June 1, 2012
